Title: Intersec Scoops Up $20M in Series B – Will Expand Global Outreach and Develop Big Data Product

Article Link: https://dataconomy.com/2014/11/12/intersec-scoops-up-20m-in-series-b-will-expand-global-outreach-and-develop-big-data-product/

Author: admin

Publish Date: 2014-11-12

Article:
Intersec, a provider of monetization solutions for mobile operators through big data collection, has landed $20 million in a series B funding round from Highland Capital Partners Europe and other existing investors.

With headquarters in Paris and New York, and offices in Dubai, Saint Petersburg, Singapore, Abidjan, Sao Paulo,Madrid, and Johannesburg, the new funding will fuel further global growth and the continued big data software development for the telecom industry as well as other interested corporations looking to harness its technology.

“Intersec has successfully transitioned over the last few years into the leading player in Telco Big Data Software, building on its leadership in Europe. The US market is key to our success and we plan to invest significantly to expand our US Headquarters in New York,” noted Yann Chevalier, CEO at Intersec. “We are extremely pleased to partner with Highland Capital Europe and value their involvement and commitment to our growth strategy and vision for international development,” he added.

Telco operators can leverage Intersec’s “next-generation software and big data technology solutions” to improve operational efficiency and build business in the areas of analytics, location-based services, customer value management and contextual engagement.

Founded in 2009, Intersec has experienced rapid growth in the last five years owing to the ability to enter new markets and to offer award-winning products that efficiently implement an operator’s loyalty & retention, value creation and cost optimization strategies. Their solution has seen adoption by operators like Telefonica, MTS, Zain, teliaSonera and Orange.

“Intersec is the epitome of what we look for in company. Superb management team, real international scale and global ambition stemming from a disruptive technology platform,” said Laurence Garrett, Highland Capital Partners Europe. Tony Zappala adds, “Intersec is breaking down the barriers of Big Data software technology and has the potential to transform the way companies make use of their Big Data for the purpose of improving their efficiency.”

New to join Intersec’s Board of Directors, as part of the funding will be Laurence Garrett and Tony Zappala, Partners at Highland Capital Partners Europe.

Read more here

Follow @DataconomyMedia

(Image Credit: Cameron Russell)

Summary: Intersec, a provider of monetization solutions for mobile operators through big data collection, has landed $20 million in a series B funding round from Highland Capital Partners Europe and other existing investors.
With headquarters in Paris and New York, and offices in Dubai, Saint Petersburg, Singapore, Abidjan, Sao Paulo,Madrid, and Johannesburg, the new funding will fuel further global growth and the continued big data software development for the telecom industry as well as other interested corporations looking to harness its technology.
“Intersec has successfully transitioned over the last few years into the leading player in Telco Big Data Software, building on its leadership in Europe.
“We are extremely pleased to partner with Highland Capital Europe and value their involvement and commitment to our growth strategy and vision for international development,” he added.
Superb management team, real international scale and global ambition stemming from a disruptive technology platform,” said Laurence Garrett, Highland Capital Partners Europe.

Other Blogs by admin: https://dataconomy.com/author/admin/
