Title: Big Data Food Tech Innovator Hampton Creek Scoops Up $90M in Series C, with Plans to Expand and Develop R&D

Article Link: https://dataconomy.com/2014/12/19/big-data-food-tech-innovator-scoops-up-90m-in-series-c-with-plans-to-expand-and-develop-rd/

Author: Dan Gray

Publish Date: 2014-12-19

Article:
Hampton Creek, the San Francisco based, food technology company with pioneering data analysis research in utilizing plant protein as an egg substitute, has just picked up $90 million in a series C round of funding.

Leading the round were Horizons Ventures and Khosla Ventures with participation from Marc Benioff, the Salesforce.com founder and CEO and Facebook’s Eduardo Saverin among others.

“The way that consumers are buying and consuming food is undergoing massive change. And for a long time technology didn’t play a role in food as it relates to the end consumer, but that’s changing drastically and Hampton Creek is on the forefront of that,” notes Craig Shapiro at Collaborative Fund, a Hampton Creek investor.

The new funding will help Hampton Creek in developing their R&D and protein substitution technology and also enhance outreach and distribution strategy.

“Part of what we do is figure out out a way to get rid of s— food that’s bad for our bodies and bad for the planet. That all requires a different approach when it comes to technology,” Hampton Creek founder and CEO Joshua Tetrick told Business Insider.

“We have distribution with some of the largest food companies in the world,” Tetrick explained, “and we’ve got to produce. We want to make sure we’re not holding back. We want to grow much deeper in Asia than we already are.”

Founded in 2011, Hampton Creek has so far garnered $120 million with products such as Just Mayo and Just Cookies being available in most retail chains. Their latest are two new products slated for release next year – Just Pasta and called Just Scrambled – both doubtlessly, eggless.

Read more here.

Follow @DataconomyMedia



(Image credit: Hampton Creek)

Summary: Hampton Creek, the San Francisco based, food technology company with pioneering data analysis research in utilizing plant protein as an egg substitute, has just picked up $90 million in a series C round of funding.
The new funding will help Hampton Creek in developing their R&D and protein substitution technology and also enhance outreach and distribution strategy.
“Part of what we do is figure out out a way to get rid of s— food that’s bad for our bodies and bad for the planet.
That all requires a different approach when it comes to technology,” Hampton Creek founder and CEO Joshua Tetrick told Business Insider.
Follow @DataconomyMedia(Image credit: Hampton Creek)

Other Blogs by Dan Gray: https://dataconomy.com/author/dan-gray/
