Title: Call for Startups: Announcing Data Natives Tel Aviv’s “Startup Battle”

Article Link: https://dataconomy.com/2016/08/23/call-startups-announcing-data-natives-tel-avivs-startup-battle/

Author: Rachel Wolfson

Publish Date: 2016-08-23

Article:
With more startups per capita than anywhere else in the world, Israel has gained the reputation of being a true “startup nation.” Yet with so many innovative startups, the competition remains tight to be accepted into leading startup accelerator programs.

This is why Data Natives Tel Aviv 2016 will be hosting their very own “Startup Battle” on September 25th.

You can register for tickets to Data Natives Tel Aviv here.

About Data Natives Tel Aviv’s Startup Battle

Data Natives Tel Aviv’s Startup Battle will offer 6 innovative startups the opportunity to be accepted to Startupbootcamp Barcelona, the largest startup accelerator in Europe and one of the top 3 largest in the world.

The Startup Battle is a great opportunity for data-driven startups seeking mentorship, networking, training, funding, development guidance and more.

Each participating startup in this year’s Startup Battle will be given 5 minutes to pitch, followed by a 2 minutes Q&A session from our judges, which include Startupbootcamp Barcelona’s Founding Partner, Angel Garcia, Startupbootcamp Mentor, Maren Lesche and the notable Tech Blogger, Hillel Fuld.

The winning startup will then be entered as a “wildcard” to pitch during Startupbootcamp Barcelona’s selection days, being one out of twenty privileged startups to make the cut (and hundreds apply!).

How do I apply to participate?

You can apply for Data Natives Tel Aviv’s Startup Battle here.

Remember, only 6 startups will be chosen to participate. You will be notified by September 15th if your startup has been selected. Goodluck!

About Startupbootcamp Barcelona

Startupbootcamp is a global family of industry-focused startup accelerators that support startups as they scale globally by providing direct access to an international network of the most relevant mentors, partners, and investors in their industry. Startupbootcamp is currently running 13 programs and has over 350 portfolio startups.

Startupbootcamp IoT&Data Tech is the Barcelona based program, with a key focus on accelerating and growing startups in the following domain:

– Virtual or Augmented Reality

– Artificial Intelligence

– Big Data Analysis

– Internet of Things

– Cyber Security

– Connectivity

– Logistics & Transportation

Have Questions?

Still wondering if your startup would make a good fit for our Startup Battle? Send your questions to: [email protected]

You can also follow us on social media to stay in the know. Connect with us on Twitter and Facebook for the latest updates on Data Natives Tel Aviv.

See you in Tel Aviv!

Summary: This is why Data Natives Tel Aviv 2016 will be hosting their very own “Startup Battle” on September 25th.
You can register for tickets to Data Natives Tel Aviv here.
About Data Natives Tel Aviv’s Startup BattleData Natives Tel Aviv’s Startup Battle will offer 6 innovative startups the opportunity to be accepted to Startupbootcamp Barcelona, the largest startup accelerator in Europe and one of the top 3 largest in the world.
You can apply for Data Natives Tel Aviv’s Startup Battle here.
Connect with us on Twitter and Facebook for the latest updates on Data Natives Tel Aviv.

Other Blogs by Rachel Wolfson: https://dataconomy.com/author/r-wolfson/
