Title: Greek companies take a concrete step into diversity and inclusion supporting talented refugee women enter the workforce at Sistech networking event

Article Link: https://dataconomy.com/2023/09/12/greek-companies-take-a-concrete-step-into-diversity-and-inclusion-supporting-talented-refugee-women-enter-the-workforce-at-sistech-networking-event/

Author: Editorial Team

Publish Date: 2023-09-12

Article:
After 5 months of intensive training & mentoring, 19 refugee women supported by Sistech, will pitch their professional project in digital & tech jobs on September 27 in Piraeus in front of a panel of HR & IT professionals from the Greek ecosystem.

Bringing a diverse range of IT skills – web development, data analysis, UX-UI design, digital project management & IT support – and with over 6 nationalities represented, Sistech’s annual event brings, for one unique evening, refugee women willing to make it on the local job market and recruiters & representatives of Greek companies of different sizes looking for new talents.

This will be the second Sistech Networking event in Greece, celebrating refugee women talents and the companies who do support their professional inclusion & hire them.

Sistech launched its first program in Greece in 2021, co-constructed with refugee women and local tech professionals, with the objectives: for refugee women to access tech & digital opportunities; for tech companies to access refugee talent.

So far, impact reports done by independent auditors on Sistech’s programs over the years show that:

The programs work in getting refugee women to sign contracts (71% of refugee women found an opportunity (first job, internship or intensive training in tech & digital);

The impact on the Fellows extends beyond their career plan and job opportunities, which creates a great impact on their families and communities.

Sistech offers free and holistic support based on three pillars: mentoring and training follow-up by volunteer professionals and networking events. In addition, Sistech covers the costs related to the specific needs of this public: professional language classes, babysitting hours to devote themselves entirely to training, transport and accommodation costs in the event of interviews, computer and wifi boxes, etc.

Featured image credit: Vonecia Carswell/Unsplash

Summary: After 5 months of intensive training & mentoring, 19 refugee women supported by Sistech, will pitch their professional project in digital & tech jobs on September 27 in Piraeus in front of a panel of HR & IT professionals from the Greek ecosystem.
This will be the second Sistech Networking event in Greece, celebrating refugee women talents and the companies who do support their professional inclusion & hire them.
Sistech launched its first program in Greece in 2021, co-constructed with refugee women and local tech professionals, with the objectives: for refugee women to access tech & digital opportunities; for tech companies to access refugee talent.
Sistech offers free and holistic support based on three pillars: mentoring and training follow-up by volunteer professionals and networking events.
Featured image credit: Vonecia Carswell/Unsplash

Other Blogs by Editorial Team: https://dataconomy.com/author/dataconomy/
