Title: Business processes need data management for their continuous improvement

Article Link: https://dataconomy.com/2022/09/05/business-process-data-management/

Author: Kerem Gülen

Publish Date: 2022-09-05

Article:
Data management enables a business process to be more efficient. The majority of contemporary organizations are aware of the value of data. This frequently means depending on the reports produced by the third-party software platforms they use daily for small firms. It is important to combine this data into a single, standardized source at some point. Data management is a business process required to organize and secure this valuable information properly.

What is a business process, and why data management is vital?

A method for describing how data is gathered and processed within a company is what data management is all about. With the need for governance surrounding the citizen developer movement, it is a subject that is receiving more and more attention.

Data consistency, dependability, and security are all ensured by an efficient data management program. Typically, the program has a governance committee and a group of data stewards. In an organization, these teams collaborate to establish, create, apply, and enforce data procedures.

Data management enables a business process to be more efficient

Gartner defines data management as:

“Data management (DM) consists of the practices, architectural techniques, and tools for achieving consistent access to and delivery of data across the spectrum of data subject areas and data structure types in the enterprise, to meet the data consumption requirements of all applications and business processes.”

How can data analytics improve business processes?

The integration of business processes with data is not a new idea. Concerning many of the current hot themes in data management, it appears to be seeing a rebirth, similar to many other basic architectural components.

Understanding that all of your clients will value connecting to business priorities and the business processes that support them is critical when dealing with various clients in different industries with quite diverse data management projects underway. Here are a few instances where business processes were used in various circumstances:

Big data analytics

Master data management

Data governance

Data quality

Master data management

The discipline of master data management (MDM) aims to provide a “single version of the truth” for key business components such as customers, products, suppliers, etc. A “single version of the truth” is a compilation of multiple viewpoints on one reality, much like the well-known tale of the blind men and the elephant. If you are unfamiliar with the traditional fable of blind men and the elephant, it is about a group of blind men who each touch an elephant to get a feel for it.

Each man has a unique idea of what it means to be an elephant based on what he touches: the trunk, the tusk, the tail, and the hide. The “single version of the truth” is a superset of all of their experiences, but each is correct in its own way. A comparable situation is presented by master data management.

Understanding that all of your clients will value connecting to business priorities and the business processes that support them is critical

Consider a typical master data domain like Product. While multiple user groups within the business have access to a comprehensive view of a “Product” with a superset of attributes, each user group understands what “Product” information contains and how it should be used.

Each supply chain organization can view, add, modify, and/or delete certain data elements that make up the idea of “Product.” Identifying these stakeholder groups and working with them to comprehend their usage and requirements around the relevant data domain is crucial for the success of MDM.

Data governance

A structured process model can be useful when managing data in the data governance domain, particularly concerning people and processes. Figuring out how and by whom data is used throughout the business process can assist in establishing the correct data stewardship and ownership. It can assist in settling disputes if there are ownership issues.

Data quality

Similar to this, the business process is crucial in the domain of data quality. Data can be cleaned, verified, and enhanced in various ways, and numerous tools and techniques are available to support data quality in these ways. However, data quality strategies are destined to be ineffectual if used in a vacuum without considering how business processes are used.

The example of a lake that harmful substances have contaminated is a frequent analogy used to explain this situation. Biologists can try to purify a lake’s water, but their efforts will be in vain if they don’t consider the streams supplying the lake with toxins. The clean lake will once more contaminate the tainted water from the streams.

Big data analytics

Rich information from big data analytics can be provided for various sources, enhancing traditional data sources like a data warehouse. To generate a “360 picture of the consumer,” it is possible to use customer data such as social media sentiment analysis, buying trends, footfall analytics, and more. But if this analysis is carried out in a vacuum, it won’t be very useful. For instance, if we have data on customer sentiment, it’s crucial to comprehend where the client is in the product’s lifecycle when this emotion is conveyed.

When big data analytics are connected to business processes, their value is increased

Have they just bought the product, started a service complaint, returned the item, etc.? To fully comprehend their experience, it is essential to link their sentiment to where they are in the purchasing lifecycle.

Everything you should know about big data services

Customer journey maps are frequently developed to understand better the customer lifecycle and how data is changed at each stage. When big data analytics are connected to business processes, their value increases.

How can big data be used to understand or optimize business processes?

For a while, “Big Data” has generated buzz across industries. Every executive has been putting new plans into practice to benefit from big data. Truth be told, the idea of big data is always changing and continues to be a driving force behind a number of digital changes, including artificial intelligence (AI), data science, and the internet of things (IoT). But how exactly can the business world benefit from big data? Here are a few illustrations we wanted to provide to motivate your staff for upcoming tasks.

Customer management

One industry that makes extensive use of big data is proper customer handling. Numerous data models have been created to evaluate customer data with great success. The analysis’s findings are efficiently streamlined to improve company choices. Applications for data analytics include:

Creating effective pricing strategies

Assessing the level of service and client satisfaction

Evaluating the success of customer-related strategies

Supply chain management improvements and Maximize customer value

Acquiring new clients and maintaining current ones

Carrying out precise prediction analysis

Certifying client data

Providing and predicting accurate consumer classification and behavior

Managing the waste

A significant share of business resources is being wasted. Businesses may effectively improve their waste management procedures with the right data management. The precision that big data analytics provides to business intelligence is its main advantage. This accuracy helps firms make informed decisions about trash management. The measurement is at the center, making it simpler to identify the business operations that generate the most waste. So, if you want to use big data to manage waste, the advice that follows will help you get the most out of it:

Choose the data that your company wants to collect

Take measurements at various times throughout the chosen process

Utilize specialists and specialized software to examine the facts and consequences.

Make the necessary changes to waste reduction.

Businesses may effectively improve their waste management procedures with the right data management

Manufacturing methods

Big data analytics are used to improve industrial methods’ precision and effectiveness. Many modern manufacturing companies are embracing the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), which is already powered by data analytics and sensor technology. Manufacturers with processes requiring massive data sets are leading the adoption race, as was to be expected.

AI in the manufacturing market will rise by 14 billion dollars in 5 years

For instance, computer chips typically go through 15,000+ testing before being issued. Predictive data models are being used, which has decreased the number of tests needed and saved millions of dollars in production costs. Small manufacturing companies are likewise reorganizing their operations using data analytics. In the manufacturing industry, big data can be applied to:

Product customization

Assessing the quality of components and raw materials

New product forecasting, testing, and simulation

Increase in energy efficiency

Evaluation of supplier performance

Risks chain management in the supply

Locating flaws and monitoring product attributes

Developing a product

Any product’s development has historically involved extensive data collecting and analysis. It primarily explains why using big data to prepare a product has substantial commercial benefits. Before releasing any product to the market, developers must gather and analyze information about the competitors, customer experience, price, and product specs. Answering the above questions can be vital when developing a new product:

Which trends are dominating the market?

What deals and prices are being offered by rivals?

What benefits and drawbacks do products from rivals have?

What issues are we trying to solve with our products?

What goods or services might astonish customers?

More process analysis of substantial data is required to fully address the abovementioned problems. Data management offers a more accurate and comprehensive approach to product development than traditional methods. This strategy guarantees that every product created is suitable to meet a market requirement.

Data management offers a more accurate and comprehensive approach to product development than traditional methods

Customer surveys, crowdfunding and manufacturer websites, marketing blogs, online product reviews, product associations, retailer catalogs, social media platforms, and other sources can all be leveraged to extract data using data analytics. When exploring the latest trends, you can also use market automation tools, for instance, we’ve listed 13 marketing automation tools that can help you boost your sales.

Finding new talent

One of the crucial parts of a firm is its human resources (HR) department. Big data analytics can be used in HR to manage and recruit talent with accuracy and thoroughness. Predictive data models, for instance, can help evaluate a worker’s performance. We have also discussed how important AI’s impact on recruitment is before. However, most companies still base these choices on insufficient information, costing them a sizable fortune over time. Big data can be used to generate more effective personnel management strategies for the following data types:

Delays in production and delivery

Absenteeism among workers

Data on training, work production, employee error rates, and profiles

The workload of employees and staffing levels

Employee incentives and performance reviews

Evaluation of revenue per employee

The six-sigma data

Big Data’s application in talent management has many benefits, including assisting management in identifying productivity issues and locating individuals with the right needs and values. Additionally, it promotes creativity, aids in management predictions, and aids in understanding the skills and requirements of various people.

Who is responsible for data management?

The IT department often implements a data management system. Typically, a CDO or the project lead is in charge of this.

A business, however, has the option of outsourcing the execution of data management. This is advised for businesses that lack a full-time Chief Data Officer (CDO) with the necessary skills or whose IT team lacks the time or resources to execute the system.

In general, a CDO is responsible for data management

Companies who want to swiftly deploy their data management system or have complicated data or requirements that will make the implementation difficult can consider outsourcing data management.

What are the 3 types of business process analysis?

According to Mark Von Rosing, the author of the book called “The Complete Corporate Process Handbook: Body of Knowledge from Process Modeling to BPM,” business processes should be organized into three subsections:

Operational process

Supporting process

Management process

Operational business processes

Asking yourself, “how does, or will, your business create income” will help you identify your operational processes. Operational processes are the procedures and duties that directly contribute to the creation of outputs from inputs.

Items like labor, unprocessed equipment, and money are examples of inputs. The finished product or service and the degree of client pleasure results are examples of outputs.

Generally speaking, if your process fits into one of the categories listed below, you can classify it as operational.

The process of developing or producing the finished good or service

The promotion of the aforementioned good or service

Even after the sale, the support and customer care you provide

Consider the scenario where you are a neighborhood greengrocer who serves your neighborhood with fresh veggies. All involved tasks—buying the fruit from the supplier, boxing it up, and distributing it to your customers—represent operational processes.

Asking yourself, “how does, or will, your business create income” will help you identify your operational processes

It’s important to remember that there may also be sub-processes, such as storage. Although it might not seem like it, this is an operational procedure because it is connected to your final product.

One of your top strategic priorities should be ensuring that your operational procedures integrate as effectively as possible.

Supporting business processes

These make up the engine room’s cogs. The supporting processes are the items that operate quietly in the background to make sure the ship can continue to sail. This indicates that they are not self-sustaining but rather exist to support the internal employee population throughout the organization. They add value, but not in monetary terms.

The payroll department, for instance, may not always bring in revenue, but without them, your employees wouldn’t get paid. The same is true for someone who cleans houses or does the dishes; even if they may not make much money from their job, you would undoubtedly notice without them.

These are either or both, strategically significant and required processes that enable the effective execution of operational processes.

Business management processes

The coordination of the aforementioned procedures happens here. This calls for planning, oversight, and general supervision.

This entails, among other managerial responsibilities, ensuring that the team is fulfilling its goals, that the workplace is safe and compliant, and employee complaints are addressed. It also entails spotting possible risks or prospects for your company, such as talent in one of your employees who could benefit from training or a potential new client who could help your company get a good deal.

The resilience of a corporation is mostly a function of effective management procedures

Management exists to maximize income potential and modify the firm as needed, even though, like supporting operations, it does not always result in direct money.

The resilience of a corporation is mostly a function of effective management procedures.

Business process management tools

A business process management (BPM) tool is a software program that supports you as a manager through all phases of business process management by assisting you in designing, modeling, executing, monitoring, and optimizing business processes.

Regardless of your present procedure’s effectiveness, there is always room for improvement. You can aim to save expenditures overall or the amount of time it takes to develop a certain asset. You can improve current business processes by using strategies like process standardization or automation.

AI and computer vision are becoming key tools for shop-and-go platforms

One of the best methods to boost productivity is through business process automation. Allow your automation platform to handle repetitive tasks rather than perform them manually.

The best business process management methods must be established as part of process standardization. Establishing defined stages will minimize failure rates while cutting expenses and time spent on repeat processes instead of doing them randomly.

Benefits of using a BPM tool

The question remains, why should YOU use a business process management (BPM) tool to optimize your business processes? In the following section, we summarize the most common benefits:

It saves time: Time is a limited resource in all facets of a business, whether you need to build a new product or fulfill client requests that have already been made. You can automate processes and free up resources with the correct BPM technologies.

Time is a limited resource in all facets of a business, whether you need to build a new product or fulfill client requests that have already been made. You can automate processes and free up resources with the correct BPM technologies. It reduces costs: You will automatically save money if your staff is able to complete jobs more quickly. Use as many of these tools as you can to get the most out of automating business process management.

You will automatically save money if your staff is able to complete jobs more quickly. Use as many of these tools as you can to get the most out of automating business process management. Brings better and higher quality outputs: BPM and workflow management systems are the answers if you want to provide improved quality and consistency across all of your company’s outputs.

BPM and workflow management systems are the answers if you want to provide improved quality and consistency across all of your company’s outputs. Reduces failure rates: Your failure rate will drop through automated and standardized operations, improving your company’s bottom line. The advantages of the best BPM solutions can be used to the advantage of all enterprises. The top business process management tools are reviewed in the section that follows. These solutions can help you cut costs and time while improving the quality of your outputs.

Conclusion

Business processes offer a crucial context for how data is used inside a company, which is essential since data is only valuable when presented properly. Business process models provide insight into how and by whom information is used, which directly affects big data analytics, big data management, master data management, and other data management projects.

Importantly, it assists in determining company priorities. Prioritizing business-critical data is a crucial step in any data management discipline because it is difficult to manage all information in an organization closely. The business process creates the backdrop for setting priorities.

Business processes offer a crucial context for how data is used inside a company, which is essential since data is only valuable when presented in its proper context

Does this information, for instance, support the revenue-generating sales cycle? Does the organization as a whole use this data across a variety of processes? Does this knowledge contribute to a more effective supply chain? If you can answer “yes” to questions like these, you can figure out the crucial information that underpins business success.

AI is the key to being a competitive business

Using process models to more completely comprehend how data is used in a company setting where cost-benefit analysis is constantly the driving factor helps grasp the benefits and drive efficiencies that cut costs. We urge you to consider incorporating business process models into your upcoming project.

Summary: Data management enables a business process to be more efficientGartner defines data management as:“Data management (DM) consists of the practices, architectural techniques, and tools for achieving consistent access to and delivery of data across the spectrum of data subject areas and data structure types in the enterprise, to meet the data consumption requirements of all applications and business processes.”How can data analytics improve business processes?
Big data analyticsRich information from big data analytics can be provided for various sources, enhancing traditional data sources like a data warehouse.
In general, a CDO is responsible for data managementCompanies who want to swiftly deploy their data management system or have complicated data or requirements that will make the implementation difficult can consider outsourcing data management.
Business process management toolsA business process management (BPM) tool is a software program that supports you as a manager through all phases of business process management by assisting you in designing, modeling, executing, monitoring, and optimizing business processes.
Business process models provide insight into how and by whom information is used, which directly affects big data analytics, big data management, master data management, and other data management projects.

Other Blogs by Kerem Gülen: https://dataconomy.com/author/kerem-gulen/
