Title: Dealstruck Announces Two New Products

Article Link: https://dataconomy.com/2014/04/30/dealstruck-announces-two-new-products/

Author: admin

Publish Date: 2014-04-30

Article:
SAN DIEGO, CA – Dealstruck, Inc, selected as the exclusive crowdlending partner to demo at FinovateSpring 2014, April 29-30 in San Jose, today unveiled two new products.

The first product is an application programming interface (API) for institutional investors, which provides them with the raw data for every deal presented on the Dealstruck platform. This data allows investors to use their own underwriting methodologies to determine how best to build out their portfolios.

The second product is an enhanced portal for accredited investors, providing them with access to detailed underwriting data used by Dealstruck so they can make investment decisions in real-time and with complete transparency. As borrowers upload documentation and progress through underwriting, investors can see the data and decision-making as it occurs.

“While Dealstruck has been originating loans for nearly a year, and has provided basic information to our lenders, today we are excited to introduce complete transparency to our crowdlending partners,” said Ethan Senturia, CEO. “For the first time, investors have access to all of the data they desire to empower them with complete confidence in their investment decisions.”

Institutional and accredited investors can easily begin to review deals by visiting https://www.dealstruck.com/.

Dealstruck is one of 70 companies that received an opportunity to present for seven minutes to banking and financial institution executives, venture capitalists, members of the press and entrepreneurs at Finovate. To schedule an appointment to meet with Dealstruck at the event, please contact [email protected].

About Dealstruck

The Dealstruck lending marketplace connects profitable, small- and medium-sized businesses (SMBs) with innovative credit solutions funded by individual and institutional accredited investors. Unlike the one-size-fits-all approach offered to them by banks and the high-cost, short-term credit offered to them by alternative lenders, Dealstruck provides growing SMBs with a suite of products that give them a credible and transparent path to bankable. Dealstruck is the first crowdlending platform to offer multiple products to SMBs, and the first to allow investors the freedom to choose specific investments. For more information, please visithttps://www.dealstruck.com/.

Summary: SAN DIEGO, CA – Dealstruck, Inc, selected as the exclusive crowdlending partner to demo at FinovateSpring 2014, April 29-30 in San Jose, today unveiled two new products.
The second product is an enhanced portal for accredited investors, providing them with access to detailed underwriting data used by Dealstruck so they can make investment decisions in real-time and with complete transparency.
As borrowers upload documentation and progress through underwriting, investors can see the data and decision-making as it occurs.
About DealstruckThe Dealstruck lending marketplace connects profitable, small- and medium-sized businesses (SMBs) with innovative credit solutions funded by individual and institutional accredited investors.
Dealstruck is the first crowdlending platform to offer multiple products to SMBs, and the first to allow investors the freedom to choose specific investments.

Other Blogs by admin: https://dataconomy.com/author/admin/
