Title: AI and big data are the driving forces behind Industry 4.0

Article Link: https://dataconomy.com/2022/11/07/big-data-and-artificial-intelligence/

Author: Kerem Gülen

Publish Date: 2022-11-07

Article:
It’s key to understanding the roles of big data and artificial intelligence in our data-driven world. Before anyone knew big data existed, it had already taken over the globe. Big data had amassed an enormous amount of stored information by the time the term was coined. If properly examined, it might provide insightful knowledge about the sector to which that particular data belonged.

The task of sorting through all of that data, parsing it (turning it into a format more easily understood by a computer), and analyzing it to enhance commercial decision-making processes was quickly found to be too much for human minds to handle. Writing algorithms with artificial intelligence would be necessary to complete the challenging task of extracting knowledge from complex data.

It’s key to understanding the roles of big data and artificial intelligence in our data-driven world

As businesses expand their big data and artificial intelligence capabilities in the upcoming years, data professionals and individuals with a master’s in business analytics or data analytics are anticipated to be in high demand. The goal is to keep up with and use the volume of data that all our computers, mobile smartphones and tablets, and Internet of Things (IoT) devices are producing.

Understanding big data and artificial intelligence

Big data and artificial intelligence are powered by several technological advancements that have defined the current digital environment and Industry 4.0. These two developments aim to maximize the value of the substantial data generated today.

Big data is the term used to describe the processing and storing of enormous amounts of structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data that have the potential to be organized and extracted into useful information for businesses and organizations.

Big data and artificial intelligence are powered by several technological advancements that have defined the current digital environment and Industry 4.0

On the other hand, artificial intelligence uses a variety of algorithms with the goal of building machines that mimic human functions (such as learning, reasoning, and making decisions). Let’s now explore these cutting-edge technologies.

What is big data?

The management of massive amounts of data from many sources is the focus of the field of “big data.” Big data is used when the amount of data is too great for conventional data management techniques to be useful. Long ago, businesses began gathering enormous volumes of data about customers, prices, transactions, and product security. However, finally, the data volume proved too great for humans to evaluate manually.

“Big data requires a new processing mode in order to have stronger decision-making, insight, and process optimization capabilities to adapt to massive, high growth rate and diversification of information assets.” Gartner

This idea conveyed a very key significance. Big data is now valued as a resource for information. We require new processing methods in the big data era to process these information assets because the original processing method cannot handle these data in a timely or accurate manner.

Five V’s of big data

The traits of large data are used to summarize another idea. Massive data scale, rapid data flow, a variety of data types, and low-value density were listed by McKinsey as the four characteristics of big data. That is what we typically refer to as the big data 4V characteristic. The definition of big data, which is the 5V features of big data that are reasonably prevalent in the industry, was created by IBM after adding the fifth characteristic afterward. Let’s examine each of the so-called 5V traits individually.

Everything you should know about big data services

Volume

The first V is the volume. That means in the big data era, a lot of data needs to be processed. Currently, this magnitude is frequently utilized for terabyte-scale data analytics and mining.

Variety

The second trait is referred to as multiple forms of data. Before most of the data that we could process was structured, that is, presented in two-dimensional tables. But in the age of big data, a wider range of data kinds must be processed, including structured, unstructured, and semi-structured data. Big data technology must process these data independently or perhaps together.

Comprehending big data and artificial intelligence is vital for future technologies

Value

Low data value density is the third attribute. Although there is a huge amount of data, not much of it is useful to us. The value density of these data is rather low because they are drowned in the large ocean of data. Therefore we must filter and mine through hundreds of millions of data, but we might only find a few dozen or a few hundred useful data.

Velocity

Fast processing speed is the fourth quality. The process of processing data to produce results used to take weeks, months, or even longer, but now we need the results in a shorter amount of time, like minutes or even seconds.

Veracity

The fifth quality is connected to the third quality. Veracity asserted that the value of commercial value is high or more real, that is, the value of the mined data is very high, whether or not it directly influences our decision-making, provides us with new information or helps us improve our processes. It is, therefore, simpler.

Corporate processes can be automated with big data and artificial intelligence solutions

These 5V characteristics of big data inform us that the term “big data” in use today includes both data and a number of processing methods. In order to make decisions or optimize for the work, we must quickly locate and mine the portion of data from a vast amount of data that is useful to our work. The entire procedure is known as big data.

Big data analytics

The often challenging process of analyzing large amounts of data to find information that might assist businesses in making wise decisions about their operations, such as hidden patterns, correlations, market trends, and customer preferences, is known as big data analytics.

Organizations can analyze data sets and gain new insights using data analytics technology and processes. Basic inquiries regarding business performance and operations are addressed by business intelligence (BI) queries.

Advanced analytics, which includes aspects like predictive models, statistical algorithms, and what-if analysis powered by analytics systems, is a subset of big data analytics.

What is artificial intelligence?

The creation and use of computer systems that are capable of logic, reasoning, and decision-making are known as artificial intelligence (AI). This self-learning technology analyzes data and produces information more quickly than human-driven methods by using visual perception, emotion detection, and language translation.

While it might seem like big data and artificial intelligence have endless potential, the technology has its limitations too

You probably already work with AI systems on a daily basis. Artificial intelligence is used in the user interfaces of some of the biggest businesses in the world, including Amazon, Google, and Facebook. Personal assistants like Siri, Alexa, and Bixby are all powered by AI, which also enables websites to suggest goods, movies, or articles that may be of interest to you. These focused recommendations are the outcome of artificial intelligence; they are not a coincidence.

Best artificial intelligence tools to improve productivity in 2022

AI and big data analytics

Although gathering data has long been a crucial aspect of business, modern digital tools have made it simpler than ever. It’s practically difficult for anyone or a company to effectively use the data they’re collecting because data sets are growing exponentially. That’s why comprehending big data, and artificial intelligence is vital.

Applications with AI capabilities may quickly process any data set, whether derived from a database or gathered in real time. AI solutions are being used by businesses to boost productivity, create personalized experiences, support decision-making, and cut costs.

Analytics and automation are frequently enhanced with data and AI, assisting organizations in transforming their operations.

Big data and artificial intelligence perks can also be used to recognize and translate languages

Analytics technologies, such as Microsoft Azure Synapse, assist organizations in anticipating or identifying trends that guide decisions regarding workflows, product development, and other areas. Your data will also be arranged into readable dashboard visualizations, reports, charts, and graphs.

Meanwhile, corporate processes can be automated when big data and artificial intelligence solutions are created. For instance, AI can enhance the manufacturing sector’s safety checks, predictive maintenance, and inventory tracking. Any company can utilize AI to evaluate documents, conduct document searches, and handle customer service inquiries.

Due to how AI analyzes visual, textual, and auditory representations, even though it hasn’t yet equaled or surpassed human intellect, technology is becoming easier to adopt and integrate into many commercial activities.

Big data and artificial intelligence systems continually refine their responses and adjust their behavior to account for new information

While it might seem like big data and artificial intelligence have endless potential, the technology has limitations. Let’s go over five areas where AI shines so you can get a full idea of how you may use it in your company:

AI may be taught to organize data, make suggestions, and aid in semantic search. These tools will enhance the user experience of your digital products by providing beneficial information that satisfies their needs. Additionally, since your application AI will keep improving its skills based on historical data, you may optimize the utility of both current and future data.

AI can be trained to analyze, recognize, and search images using computer vision, a class of algorithms designed to comprehend and react to images and video. AI with vision training can store and caption documents and support IoT sensor arrays. Many sectors are using visual tracking to boost productivity and effectiveness.

Customers demand current search engines’ accuracy and speed, but it might be challenging to match those high standards with your own tools. With AI, you can improve the search capabilities of your digital tools and enable them to analyze webpages, photos, videos, and more to provide consumers with the exact results they’re looking for.

By turning speech to text and text to speech, AI technology is frequently used to engage customers. You can simply review recorded customer conversations with annotated transcripts for studying customer behavior or instructing personnel. You can also create speech-based assistants like Siri or Alexa in your applications.

Natural Language Processing makes it possible to converse with our technology in entire phrases, the way people naturally converse and receive meaningful responses (NLP). You can integrate NLP into your applications or bots to better serve user demands or create customer support tools that can have voice or text conversations. These big data and artificial intelligence perks can also be used to recognize and translate languages.

Big data vs artificial intelligence

At this point, big data is unquestionably here to stay, and artificial intelligence (AI) will continue to be in high demand. AI is meaningless without data, yet mastering data is impossible without AI. Therefore data and AI are melding into a synergistic connection.

EU’s Artificial Intelligence Act: Does regulation counteract innovation?

By fusing the two disciplines, we may start to recognize and forecast future trends in business, technology, commerce, entertainment, and everything in between.

Big data is the initial, unprocessed input that must be cleaned, organized, and integrated before it can be used; artificial intelligence is the final, intelligent product of data processing. The two are hence fundamentally different.

Despite their stark differences, big data and artificial intelligence nonetheless complement one another effectively

Artificial intelligence is a type of computer that enables robots to carry out cognitive tasks, such as acting or responding to input, in a manner that is analogous to that of humans. Traditional computing apps also respond to data, but all of these activities need hand-coding. The program is unable to respond if a curveball of any kind, such as an unexpected result, is thrown. As a result, big data and artificial intelligence systems continually refine their responses and adjust their behavior to account for new information.

A machine with AI capabilities is built to analyze and interpret data, solve problems or deal with problems depending on those interpretations. With machine learning, the computer first learns how to behave or respond to a certain result and then understands to act in the same way going forward.

Big data only search for results rather than acting on them. It describes incredibly vast quantities of data as well as data that can be exceedingly diverse. Structured data, like transactional data in a relational database, can be found in big data sets, and less structured or unstructured data, such as photographs, email data, sensor data, and so on.

Big data and artificial intelligence are still indispensable twins

They differ in how they are used as well. Gaining insight is the main goal of using big data. How does Netflix come up with recommendations for movies and TV series based on what you watch? Because it considers the purchasing patterns and preferences of other consumers and infers that you would feel the same way.

AI is about making decisions and improving upon those decisions. AI is performing jobs previously performed by humans but more quickly and with fewer mistakes, whether it is self-tuning software, self-driving automobiles, or analyzing medical samples. These are mainly the differences between big data and artificial intelligence technologies.

Big data and artificial intelligence are still indispensable twins

Despite their stark differences, big data and artificial intelligence nonetheless complement one another effectively. This is so because machine learning, in particular, needs data to develop its intelligence. For example, a machine learning picture identification program studies thousands of images of an airplane to determine what makes one so it can identify them in the future.

Big data is the starting point, but in order to train the model, it must be sufficiently structured and integrated for computers to spot useful patterns in the data consistently.

Big data collects enormous volumes of data, but before anything useful can be done with it, the wheat must be separated from the chafe. The unwanted, redundant, and useless data that is used in AI and ML has already been “cleaned” and deleted. So that’s the significant first step.

Some industries utilize big data and artificial intelligence

AI can then prosper after that. The data required to train the learning algorithms can be provided by big data. There are two sorts of data learning: routinely collected data and initial training, which acts as a kind of priming of the pump. Once they have completed their initial training, AI programs never stop learning. They keep acquiring fresh information, and as the data evolves, they adapt their course of action accordingly. Data is, therefore, initially and continuously required.

Pattern recognition is used in both computer paradigms, but they do so in distinct ways. Big data analytics uses sequential analysis to discover patterns in data that have occasionally been collected in the past, or “cold data.”

Machine learning continuously gathers data and learns from it. Your self-driving car continuously gathers data, learns new skills, and improves operations. New data is constantly being received and used. This indicates that big data and artificial intelligence are in a mutual relationship.

The future of big data and artificial intelligence

The rapid use of the Internet of Things digitizes data across the economy, making it now possible for AI systems to process or analyze it. As a result, AI is becoming more prevalent in various industries and companies. Some industries that utilize big data and artificial intelligence can be found below:

Big data and artificial intelligence in healthcare

According to Accenture, integrating AI into the US healthcare system may save $150 billion annually by 2026 while also improving patient outcomes. Big data and artificial intelligence are predicted to transform a range of facets of healthcare, from robotic surgery, made possible by combining diagnostic imaging and pre-op medical data, to virtual nursing assistants that assist with initial diagnosis and patient logistics.

Big data and artificial intelligence are predicted to transform a range of facets of healthcare

Big data and artificial intelligence in autonomous vehicle development

Autonomous vehicles (AVs), which are controlled by AI, are destined to cause a significant disruption in the transportation sector. In order to successfully observe the road and operate the vehicle, AI software included in an AV computes billions of data points every second using inputs from advanced sensors, GPS, cameras, and radar systems.

AI in agriculture: Computer vision and robots are being used for higher efficiency

While there are still challenges before complete automation, high-end vehicles can handle fundamental driving tasks with little to no human involvement, thanks to big data and artificial intelligence. Additionally, testing of automated vehicles (AVs) that, in some circumstances, may operate autonomously in all areas of driving has begun.

Autonomous vehicles can handle fundamental driving tasks with little to no human involvement, thanks to big data and artificial intelligence

Big data and artificial intelligence smart assistant development

Digital assistants are becoming more dynamic and practical due to advances in voice recognition, predictive analytics, and natural language processing. According to experts, as consumers move away from the keyboard, voice searches will account for 50% of all Internet queries by 2023 with the development of big data and artificial intelligence technologies.

Big data and artificial intelligence are driving smart assistant development

Big data and artificial intelligence in industrial automation systems

Industrial automation is at the forefront of the application of big data and artificial intelligence in the physical world, spurred by soaring global investment in robots that may approach $180 billion by 2020. Advancements in both sectors are combining to produce machines that are smarter and more competent than before, with robotics serving as a machine’s body and AI serving as a machine’s mind. Robots may now function more freely in unstructured settings like factories or warehouses. They can work more closely with humans on assembly lines, meaning they are no longer limited to simple, repetitive jobs.

Industrial automation is at the forefront of the application of big data and artificial intelligence in the physical world

Conclusion

These days, two key areas of computer science are big data and artificial intelligence. Research in the areas of big data and artificial intelligence hasn’t halted recently. Artificial intelligence and big data are inseparable. First, because big data technology makes extensive use of artificial intelligence theories and techniques, it depends on AI’s progress. Second, big data technology is essential to the advancement of artificial intelligence because this field depends heavily on data. We still need to learn about new technologies because big data and artificial intelligence innovation has only just begun.

Summary: The management of massive amounts of data from many sources is the focus of the field of “big data.” Big data is used when the amount of data is too great for conventional data management techniques to be useful.
Massive data scale, rapid data flow, a variety of data types, and low-value density were listed by McKinsey as the four characteristics of big data.
The definition of big data, which is the 5V features of big data that are reasonably prevalent in the industry, was created by IBM after adding the fifth characteristic afterward.
Structured data, like transactional data in a relational database, can be found in big data sets, and less structured or unstructured data, such as photographs, email data, sensor data, and so on.
Big data and artificial intelligence are still indispensable twinsDespite their stark differences, big data and artificial intelligence nonetheless complement one another effectively.

Other Blogs by Kerem Gülen: https://dataconomy.com/author/kerem-gulen/
